Add new Hello Timescale tutorial and delete old Hello NYC tutorial (#302)
timescale/docs.timescale.com-content: tutorials/tutorial-hello-timescale.md

* Payment type (Cash, credit card, etc.)

To efficiently store that data, we’re going to need three tables:
    1.	1 hypertable called `rides`, which will store all of the above data for each ride taken. 
    2.	1 regular Postgres table called `payment_types`, which maps the payment types to their English description.
    3.	1 regular Postgres table called `rates`, which maps the numeric rate codes to their English description.

The `nyc_data.sql` script defines the schema for our three tables. The scripts
automatically configure your TimescaleDB instance with the appropriate 
`rides`, `payment_types`, and `rates` tables.

In the command below, be sure to substitute the items in the curly braces with
information from your Timescale Cloud account, as you did earlier. Also take
note that this command includes the `nyc_data` database we created a moment ago.

```bash
psql -x "postgres://tsdbadmin:{YOUR_PASSWORD_HERE}@{|YOUR_HOSTNAME_HERE}:{YOUR_PORT_HERE}/nyc_data?sslmode=require" < nyc_data.sql
```

Alternatively, you can run each script manually from the `psql` command
line. This first script will create table `rides`, which will store 
trip data:

```sql

> CREATE TABLE "rides"(

Author: That's the way it is in the script.

    vendor_id TEXT,
    pickup_datetime TIMESTAMP WITHOUT TIME ZONE NOT NULL,
    dropoff_datetime TIMESTAMP WITHOUT TIME ZONE NOT NULL,
    passenger_count NUMERIC,
    trip_distance NUMERIC,
    pickup_longitude  NUMERIC,
    pickup_latitude   NUMERIC,
    rate_code         INTEGER,
    dropoff_longitude NUMERIC,
    dropoff_latitude  NUMERIC,
    payment_type INTEGER,
    fare_amount NUMERIC,
    extra NUMERIC,
    mta_tax NUMERIC,
    tip_amount NUMERIC,
    tolls_amount NUMERIC,
    improvement_surcharge NUMERIC,
    total_amount NUMERIC
);
SELECT create_hypertable('rides', 'pickup_datetime', 'payment_type', 2, create_default_indexes=>FALSE);
CREATE INDEX ON rides (vendor_id, pickup_datetime desc);
CREATE INDEX ON rides (pickup_datetime desc, vendor_id);

> CREATE INDEX ON rides (rate_code, pickup_datetime DESC);

Author: This is how it is in the script. I changed it to all upper case in the PR as you requested, though.

CREATE INDEX ON rides (passenger_count, pickup_datetime desc);
```

This script will create table `payment_types` and preconfigure
the types of payments taxis can accept:

```sql

> CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS "payment_types"(

Author: That's the way it is in the script.

tip_amount            | 0
tolls_amount          | 0
improvement_surcharge | 0.3
total_amount          | 10.3
-[ RECORD 2 ]---------+--------------------
vendor_id             | 1
pickup_datetime       | 2016-01-01 00:00:02
dropoff_datetime      | 2016-01-01 00:11:14
passenger_count       | 1
trip_distance         | 6.00
pickup_longitude      | -73.947151184082031
pickup_latitude       | 40.791046142578125
rate_code             | 1
dropoff_longitude     | -73.920768737792969
dropoff_latitude      | 40.865577697753906
payment_type          | 2
fare_amount           | 18
extra                 | 0.5
mta_tax               | 0.5
tip_amount            | 0
tolls_amount          | 0
improvement_surcharge | 0.3
total_amount          | 19.3
```

### Mission 2: Analysis

Let's say that the NYC Taxi and Limousine Commission has made it a key
goal to mitigate the impact of global warming by reducing their greenhouse 
gas emissions by 20% by 2024. Given the number of taxi rides taken each 
day, they believe studying past taxi rider history and behavior will enable 
them to plan for the future.

To start, you will make sense of historical taxi ride data, draw insights, and 

> use your analysis to plan for the future. In this tutorial, we will limit analysis 

Reviewer: 'plan for the future' is repeated in these two paragraphs in close proximity.  Consider rewording

to all NYC TLC taxi rides taken in January 2016. You can imagine that in a
more expansive scenario, you will want to examine rides taken over several years.

#### How many rides took place on each day?

The first question you will explore is simple: *How many rides took place on each day during January 2016?*

Since TimescaleDB supports full SQL, all that’s required is a simple SQL query 
to count the number of rides and group/ order them by the day they took place, 
as seen below:

```sql
-- What's the total number of rides that took place everyday for first 5 days
SELECT date_trunc('day', pickup_datetime) as day, COUNT(*) FROM rides GROUP BY day ORDER BY day;
```

With this information, we know *how many* rides are taken each day, and we can
identify the days of the week and month in which the most rides take place.
Your result should look like this:

```sql

>          day         | count  

Reviewer: related to the previous comment about the expanded flag, if the tutorial taker switched to expanded, then they would need to switch back to get this result.

 2016-01-06 00:00:00 | 348516
 2016-01-07 00:00:00 | 364894
 2016-01-08 00:00:00 | 392070
 2016-01-09 00:00:00 | 405825
 2016-01-10 00:00:00 | 351788
 2016-01-11 00:00:00 | 342651
 2016-01-12 00:00:00 | 367390
 2016-01-13 00:00:00 | 395090
 2016-01-14 00:00:00 | 396473
 2016-01-15 00:00:00 | 401289
 2016-01-16 00:00:00 | 411899
 2016-01-17 00:00:00 | 379156
 2016-01-18 00:00:00 | 341481
 2016-01-19 00:00:00 | 385187
 2016-01-20 00:00:00 | 382105
 2016-01-21 00:00:00 | 399654
 2016-01-22 00:00:00 | 420162
 2016-01-23 00:00:00 |  78133
 2016-01-24 00:00:00 | 159766
 2016-01-25 00:00:00 | 282087
 2016-01-26 00:00:00 | 327655
 2016-01-27 00:00:00 | 359180
 2016-01-28 00:00:00 | 383326
 2016-01-29 00:00:00 | 414039
 2016-01-30 00:00:00 | 435369
 2016-01-31 00:00:00 | 361505
 2017-11-17 00:00:00 |      2
(32 rows)
```

#### What is the average fare amount for 2+ passengers?

But this initial analysis is incomplete. We also need to understand how long each
ride is. After all, if we're looking to lessen the impact on the environment, we
probably want to discourage idle taxis and short trips.

One way we can glean insight into the duration of trips is by looking into 

> the daily average fare amount for rides with 2+ passengers. Once 

Reviewer: Why 2+ passengers?  It seems arbitrary without a stated reason.

again, this is a simple four line SQL query with some conditional statements,
shown in the query below:

```sql
-- What is the daily average fare amount for rides with 2 or more passengers
-- for first 7 days?

> SELECT date_trunc('day', pickup_datetime) as day, avg(fare_amount) FROM rides WHERE passenger_count > 1 AND pickup_datetime < '2016-01-08' GROUP BY day ORDER BY day;

Reviewer: For this longer SQL statement, it's probably better to write it vertically so that it's clearer

```

> >:TIP: Queries like the ones above execute up to 20x faster on TimescaleDB than on a vanilla PostgreSQL database, thanks to Timescale’s automatic time and space partitioning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>:TIP: Queries like the ones above execute up to 20x faster on large datasets with TimescaleDB vs. a vanilla PostgreSQL database, thanks to TimescaleDB’s automatic time and space partitioning.
```
It's important to stress this b/c otherwise the common complaint is that benchmarks don't show a difference between the two

Your result should look like this:

```sql
         day         |         avg         
---------------------+---------------------
 2016-01-01 00:00:00 | 13.3990821679715529
 2016-01-02 00:00:00 | 13.0224687415181399
 2016-01-03 00:00:00 | 13.5382068607068607
 2016-01-04 00:00:00 | 12.9618895561740149
 2016-01-05 00:00:00 | 12.6614611935518309
 2016-01-06 00:00:00 | 12.5775245695086098
 2016-01-07 00:00:00 | 12.5868802584437019
(7 rows)
```

> #### How many rides took place by each rate type?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### How many rides took place for each rate type?
```

are pre-set, regardless of the length. For example, trips to and from the airport are 
a flat rate from within the city. So, let's examine the breakdown of 
rides by ride type. This is also a fairly straightforward SQL query:

```sql
-- How many rides of each rate type took place in the month?
SELECT rate_code, COUNT(vendor_id) as num_trips FROM rides
WHERE pickup_datetime < '2016-02-01'
GROUP BY rate_code ORDER BY rate_code;
```

After running the query above, you’ll get the following output, 
which shows how many rides of each rate code took place:

```sql
 rate_code | num_trips 
-----------+-----------
         1 |  10626315
         2 |    225019
         3 |     16822
         4 |      4696
         5 |     33688
         6 |       102
        99 |       216
(7 rows)
```

While that’s technically correct, you’d like to use something more human 
readable. To do that, we can use the power of SQL joins, and combine
these results with the contents of the `rates` table, like in the query below:

```sql
-- How many rides of each rate type took place?
-- Join rides with rates to get more information on rate_code

> SELECT rates.description, COUNT(vendor_id) as num_trips FROM rides

Reviewer: Make this query fully vertical: `FROM`, `ORDER BY` conditions should be on separate lines

- Newark trips are 22% (10 min) shorter.

This data is useful not just for city planners, but also for airport travellers 
and tourism organizations like the NYC Tourism Bureau. For example, a tourism 
organization could recommend cost-conscious travelers who’d rather not fork out 
$84 for a ride to Newark to use public transport instead, like the NJ Transit 
train from Penn Station ($15.25 for an adult ticket). Similarly, they could 
recommend those travelling to JFK airport, and who are weary of heavy traffic, 
to take the subway and airtrain instead, for just $7.50.

Moreover, you could also make recommendations for those flying out of 
New York City about which airport to choose. For example, from the data above, 
we can recommend those travellers who think they’d be in a rush and who don’t 
mind paying a little extra to consider flying out of Newark over JFK.

If you’ve made it this far, you’ve successfully completed Mission 2 and now 
have a basic understanding of how to analyze time-series data using TimescaleDB!

### Mission 3: Monitoring

We can also use the time-series data from taxi rides for monitoring 

> the ride’s current status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a ride’s current status.
```

#### How many rides took place every 5 minutes for the first day of 2016?
It’s January 1st 2016. NYC riders have celebrated New Year’s Eve, and using taxi 
cabs to travel to and from their first gathering of the new year.

The first thing you may like to know is how many rides have recently taken 
place. We can approximate that by counting the number of rides that were 
completed on the first day of 2016, in 5 minute intervals.

While it's easy to count how many rides took place, there is no easy way 
to segment data by 5 minute time intervals in PostgreSQL. As a result, we 
will need to use a query similar to the query below: 

```sql
-- Vanilla Postgres query for num rides every 5 minutes
SELECT
  EXTRACT(hour from pickup_datetime) as hours,
  trunc(EXTRACT(minute from pickup_datetime) / 5)*5 AS five_mins,
  COUNT(*)
FROM rides
WHERE pickup_datetime < '2016-01-02 00:00'
GROUP BY hours, five_mins;
```

It may not be immediately clear why the above query returns rides segmented 
by 5 minute buckets, so let’s examine it more closely, using the sample time 
of 08:49:00.

> >:TIP: To see how Timescale simplifies common time-series analysis tasks, like segmenting data by arbitrary time intervals, you can skip ahead to the next query.

Reviewer: add a link here (on 'skip ahead') to an (also added) anchor below to the next query

Author: Deleted this tip altogether. It doesn't really make sense anyway.

In the above query, we first extract the hour that a ride took place in:

```sql
EXTRACT(hour from pickup_datetime) as hours
```
  

> So for 08:49 our result for hours would be 8. Then we need to calculate, `five_mins`, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So for 08:49 our result for `hours` would be 8. Then we need to calculate, `five_mins`, 
```

the closest multiple of 5 minutes for a given timestamp. To do this, we calculate 
the quotient of the minute that a ride took place divided by 5. Then we truncate 
the result to take the floor of that quotient. Afterward, we multiply that truncated 

> quotient by 5 to in essence find the 5 minute bucket that the minute is closest to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
quotient by 5 to, in essence, find the 5 minute bucket that the minute is closest to:
```

```sql
trunc(EXTRACT(minute from pickup_datetime) / 5)*5 AS five_mins
```

So our result for time of 08:49 would be `trunc(49/5)*5 = trunc(9.8)*5 = 9*5 = 45`, 

> so this time would be in the 45min bucket. After exacting both the hours and which 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so this time would be in the 45min bucket. After extracting both the `hours` and which 
```

5 minute interval the time fell into, we’d then group our results, first by the 

> hours and then the five_mins interval. Whew, that was a lot for a conceptually 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`hours` and then the `five_mins` interval. Whew, that was a lot for a conceptually 
```

simple question!

>:TIP: This problem is one of the biggest reasons why people choose purpose-built time-series databases like TimescaleDB.

> Questions that call for segmentation by arbitrary time intervals are common in 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Segmentation by arbitrary time intervals is common in 
```

time-series analysis, but can sometimes be unwieldy in vanilla PostgreSQL. Thankfully, 
to help make time-series analysis quick and simple, TimescaleDB has many SQL functions 
specifically made for time-series analysis. One of those special TimescaleDB SQL 

> functions is `time_bucket`. `time_bucket` is a more powerful version of the PostgreSQL 

Reviewer: Change to
> Thankfully, TimescaleDB has many custom-built SQL functions to make time-series analysis quick and simple.  For example `time_bucket` is a more powerful version of the PostgreSQL `date_trunc` function.  It allows for...

`date_trunc` function, as it allows for arbitrary time intervals, 
rather than the standard day, minute, hour provided by `date_trunc`.

> So when using TimescaleDB, the complex query above turns into a simple four line 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So when using TimescaleDB, the complex query above turns into a simpler
```
The number of lines for a SQL query is kind of arbitrary.

SQL query, as seen below:

```sql
-- How many rides took place every 5 minutes for the first day of 2016?
-- using the TimescaleDB "time_bucket" function
SELECT time_bucket('5 minute', pickup_datetime) AS five_min, count(*)
FROM rides
WHERE pickup_datetime < '2016-01-02 00:00'

> GROUP BY five_min ORDER BY five_min;

Reviewer: `ORDER BY` on next line

```

The result of your query should start something like this:

```sql
      five_min       | count 
---------------------+-------
 2016-01-01 00:00:00 |   703
 2016-01-01 00:05:00 |  1482
 2016-01-01 00:10:00 |  1959
 2016-01-01 00:15:00 |  2200
 2016-01-01 00:20:00 |  2285

```

> #### How many rides on New Year’s Morning originated from within 400m of Times Square, by 30 minute buckets?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### How many rides on New Year’s morning originated from within 400m of Times Square, in 30 minute buckets?
```

New York City is famous for its annual Ball Drop New Year’s Eve 
celebration in Times Square. Thousands of people gather to bring in the 
new year together and then head home, to their favorite bar, or first 
gathering of the new year.

This matters to your analysis because you’d like to understand taxi demand
in peak times, and there's no more peak time in New York than the Times Square area 
on the first day of the year.

To answer this question, your first guess might be to use our friend `time_bucket` 
from the earlier lessons to count rides initiated in 30 minute intervals. But 

> there’s one piece of information we don’t have -- how do we figure out 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there’s one piece of information we don’t have: how do we figure out 
```

which rides started *near Times Square*?

This requires that we make use of the pickup latitude and longitude columns 
in our `rides` hypertable. To use the pickup location, we’ll need to get our 
hypertable ready for geospatial queries.

> The good news is that TimescaleDB is compatible with all other Postgres 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The good news is that TimescaleDB is compatible with all other PostgreSQL
```

extensions and, for geospatial data, we’ll use [PostGIS][postgis]. This allows us 
to slice data by time and location with the speed and scale of TimescaleDB!

```sql
-- Geospatial queries - TimescaleDB + POSTGIS -- slice by time and location
-- Install the extension in the database
CREATE EXTENSION postgis;
```

Then, run the `\dx` command in `psql` to verify that PostGIS was installed properly. 
You should see the PostGIS extension in your extension list, as noted below:

```sql
                                        List of installed extensions 
     Name     | Version |   Schema   |                             Description
 -------------+---------+------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------
  plpgsql     | 1.0     | pg_catalog | PL/pgSQL procedural language
  postgis     | 2.5.1   | public     | PostGIS geometry, geography, and raster spatial types and functions

>   timescaledb | 1.4.2   | public     | Enables scalable inserts and complex queries for time-series data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  timescaledb | x.y.z   | public     | Enables scalable inserts and complex queries for time-series data
```

 (3 rows)
 ```

Now, we need to alter our table to work with PostGIS. To start, we’ll add 
geometry columns for ride pick up and drop off locations:

```sql
-- Create geometry columns for each of our (lat,long) points
ALTER TABLE rides ADD COLUMN pickup_geom geometry(POINT,2163);
ALTER TABLE rides ADD COLUMN dropoff_geom geometry(POINT,2163);
```

Next we’ll need to convert the latitude and longitude points into geometry coordinates 
so that it plays well with PostGIS:

>:WARNING: This next query may take several minutes.

```sql
-- Generate the geometry points and write to table
UPDATE rides SET pickup_geom = ST_Transform(ST_SetSRID(ST_MakePoint(pickup_longitude,pickup_latitude),4326),2163);
UPDATE rides SET dropoff_geom = ST_Transform(ST_SetSRID(ST_MakePoint(dropoff_longitude,dropoff_latitude),4326),2163);
```

Lastly, we need one more piece of info: Times Square is located at (`lat`, `long`) (`40.7589`,`-73.9851`).

Now, we have all the information to answer our original question: 

> *How many rides on New Year’s Morning originated within 400m of Times Square, by 30 minute buckets?*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*How many rides on New Year’s morning originated within 400m of Times Square, in 30 minute buckets?*
```

 2016-01-01 09:00:00 |           115
 2016-01-01 09:30:00 |           118
 2016-01-01 10:00:00 |           135
 2016-01-01 10:30:00 |           160
 2016-01-01 11:00:00 |           212
 2016-01-01 11:30:00 |           229
 2016-01-01 12:00:00 |           244
 2016-01-01 12:30:00 |           230
 2016-01-01 13:00:00 |           235
 2016-01-01 13:30:00 |           238
(28 rows)
```

From the figure above, you can surmise that few people wanted to leave 
by taxi around midnight, while many left by taxi between 03:00-05:00, after the 
bars, clubs, and other New Year's Eve parties closed. This is useful information
for capacity planning, reducing idling vehicles, and pre-positioning alternative
transportation with a smaller carbon footprint, such as shuttle buses to/from
subway and train lines.

As an aside, the data also shows you that rides then picked up in the mid-morning 
hours, as people headed to breakfast and other New Years activities. New York is 
truly the city that never sleeps and Times Square is a good reflection of that!

### Conclusions and Next Steps
In this tutorial you learned how to get started with TimescaleDB and Timescale Cloud.

> In Mission 1, you learned how to connect to a TimescaleDB database in 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In **Mission 1**, you learned how to connect to a TimescaleDB database in 
```

Timescale Cloud and load data from a CSV file using `psql`.

> In Missions 2 and 3 you learned how to use TimescaleDB to conduct analysis and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In **Missions 2 and 3** you learned how to use TimescaleDB to conduct analysis and 
```

with your relational or business data.

You also learned about special TimescaleDB SQL functions like `time_bucket` and 
how they make time-series analysis possible in fewer lines of code, as well 
as how TimescaleDB is compatible with other extensions like *PostGIS*, for fast 
querying by time and location.

Ready for more learning? Here’s a few suggestions:
- [Time Series Forecasting using TimescaleDB, R, Apache MADlib and Python][time-series-forecasting]
- [Continuous Aggregates][continuous-aggregates]
- [Try Other Sample Datasets][other-samples]
- [Migrate your own Data][migrate]

[timescale-cloud]: https://www.timescale.com/products
[timescale-cloud-install]: /getting-started/installation/timescale-cloud/installation-timescale-cloud
[timescale-community-install]: /getting-started/setup
[setup-psql]: https://blog.timescale.com/tutorials/how-to-install-psql-on-mac-ubuntu-debian-windows/
[install]: /getting-started/installation
[NYCTLC]: http://www.nyc.gov/html/tlc/html/about/trip_record_data.shtml
[nyc_data]: https://timescaledata.blob.core.windows.net/datasets/nyc_data.tar.gz
[postgis]: http://postgis.net/documentation

> [time-series-forecasting]: https://docs.timescale.com/latest/tutorials/tutorial-forecasting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[time-series-forecasting]: /tutorials/tutorial-forecasting
```

> [continuous-aggregates]: https://docs.timescale.com/latest/tutorials/continuous-aggs-tutorial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[continuous-aggregates]: /tutorials/continuous-aggs-tutorial
```

pickup_latitude       | 40.791046142578125
rate_code             | 1
dropoff_longitude     | -73.920768737792969
dropoff_latitude      | 40.865577697753906
payment_type          | 2
fare_amount           | 18
extra                 | 0.5
mta_tax               | 0.5
tip_amount            | 0
tolls_amount          | 0
improvement_surcharge | 0.3
total_amount          | 19.3
```

### Mission 2: Analysis

Let's say that the NYC Taxi and Limousine Commission has made it a key
goal to mitigate the impact of global warming by reducing their greenhouse 
gas emissions by 20% by 2024. Given the number of taxi rides taken each 
day, they believe studying past taxi rider history and behavior will enable 
them to plan for the future.

In this tutorial, we will limit analysis of historical taxi ride data
to all NYC TLC taxi rides taken in January 2016. You can imagine that in a
more expansive scenario, you will want to examine rides taken over several years.

#### How many rides took place on each day?

The first question you will explore is simple: *How many rides took place on each day during January 2016?*

Since TimescaleDB supports full SQL, all that’s required is a simple SQL query 

> to count the number of rides and group/ order them by the day they took place, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to count the number of rides and group/order them by the day they took place, 
```

identify the days of the week and month in which the most rides take place.
Your result should look like this:

```sql
         day         | count  
---------------------+--------
 2016-01-01 00:00:00 | 345037
 2016-01-02 00:00:00 | 312831
 2016-01-03 00:00:00 | 302878
 2016-01-04 00:00:00 | 316171
 2016-01-05 00:00:00 | 343251
 2016-01-06 00:00:00 | 348516
 2016-01-07 00:00:00 | 364894
 2016-01-08 00:00:00 | 392070
 2016-01-09 00:00:00 | 405825
 2016-01-10 00:00:00 | 351788
 2016-01-11 00:00:00 | 342651
 2016-01-12 00:00:00 | 367390
 2016-01-13 00:00:00 | 395090
 2016-01-14 00:00:00 | 396473
 2016-01-15 00:00:00 | 401289
 2016-01-16 00:00:00 | 411899
 2016-01-17 00:00:00 | 379156
 2016-01-18 00:00:00 | 341481
 2016-01-19 00:00:00 | 385187
 2016-01-20 00:00:00 | 382105
 2016-01-21 00:00:00 | 399654
 2016-01-22 00:00:00 | 420162
 2016-01-23 00:00:00 |  78133
 2016-01-24 00:00:00 | 159766
 2016-01-25 00:00:00 | 282087
 2016-01-26 00:00:00 | 327655
 2016-01-27 00:00:00 | 359180
 2016-01-28 00:00:00 | 383326
 2016-01-29 00:00:00 | 414039
 2016-01-30 00:00:00 | 435369
 2016-01-31 00:00:00 | 361505
 2017-11-17 00:00:00 |      2
(32 rows)
```

> #### What is the average fare amount for 2+ passengers?

Reviewer: If you are switching everything over to one passenger, this header needs to change as well

are pre-set, regardless of the length. For example, trips to and from the airport are 
a flat rate from within the city. So, let's examine the breakdown of 
rides by ride type. This is also a fairly straightforward SQL query:

```sql
-- How many rides of each rate type took place in the month?
SELECT rate_code, COUNT(vendor_id) AS num_trips 
FROM rides
WHERE pickup_datetime < '2016-02-01'
GROUP BY rate_code 
ORDER BY rate_code;
```

After running the query above, you’ll get the following output, 
which shows how many rides of each rate code took place:

```sql
 rate_code | num_trips 
-----------+-----------
         1 |  10626315
         2 |    225019
         3 |     16822
         4 |      4696
         5 |     33688
         6 |       102
        99 |       216
(7 rows)
```

While that’s technically correct, you’d like to use something more human 
readable. To do that, we can use the power of SQL joins, and combine
these results with the contents of the `rates` table, like in the query below:

```sql
-- How many rides of each rate type took place?
-- Join rides with rates to get more information on rate_code

> SELECT rates.description, COUNT(vendor_id) as num_trips FROM rides

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT rates.description, COUNT(vendor_id) AS num_trips 
FROM rides
```

Reviewer: Capitalization in SQL commands/conditionals should be consistent throughout

>   JOIN rates on rides.rate_code = rates.rate_code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  JOIN rates ON rides.rate_code = rates.rate_code
```

  WHERE pickup_datetime < '2016-02-01'

>   GROUP BY rates.description ORDER BY rates.description;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  GROUP BY rates.description 
  ORDER BY rates.description;
```

 standard rate         |  10626315
(6 rows)
```

#### Analysis of rides to JFK and EWR

From your work calculating rides by rate type, the NYC TLC noticed that 
rides to John F Kennedy International Airport (JFK) and Newark International 
Airport (EWR) were the second and fourth most popular ride types, respectively. 
Given this popularity in airport rides and consequent carbon footprint, 
the city of New York thinks that airport public transportation could be 
an area of improvement - reducing traffic in the city and overall carbon 
footprint associated with airport trips.

Prior to instituting any programs, they would like you to more closely 
examine trips to JFK (code 2) and Newark (code 3). For each airport, they 
would like to know the following for the month of January:
- Number of trips to that airport
- Average trip duration (i.e drop off time - pickup time)
- Average trip cost
- Average tip
- Minimum, Maximum and Average trip distance
- Average number of passengers

To do this, we can run the following query:

```sql
-- For each airport: num trips, avg trip duration, avg cost, avg tip, avg distance, min distance, max distance, avg number of passengers

> SELECT rates.description, COUNT(vendor_id) as num_trips,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT rates.description, COUNT(vendor_id) AS num_trips,
```

>    AVG(dropoff_datetime - pickup_datetime) as avg_trip_duration, AVG(total_amount) as avg_total,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   AVG(dropoff_datetime - pickup_datetime) AS avg_trip_duration, AVG(total_amount) AS avg_total,
```

>    AVG(tip_amount) as avg_tip, MIN(trip_distance) as min_distance, AVG (trip_distance) as avg_distance, MAX(trip_distance) as max_distance,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   AVG(tip_amount) AS avg_tip, MIN(trip_distance) AS min_distance, AVG (trip_distance) AS avg_distance, MAX(trip_distance) AS max_distance,
```

>    AVG(passenger_count) as avg_passengers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   AVG(passenger_count) AS avg_passengers
```

 FROM rides

>  JOIN rates on rides.rate_code = rates.rate_code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 JOIN rates ON rides.rate_code = rates.rate_code
```

>  WHERE rides.rate_code in (2,3) AND pickup_datetime < '2016-02-01'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 WHERE rides.rate_code IN (2,3) AND pickup_datetime < '2016-02-01'
```

>  GROUP BY rates.description ORDER BY rates.description;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 GROUP BY rates.description 
 ORDER BY rates.description;
```

```

Which produces the following output:

```sql
-[ RECORD 1 ]-----+--------------------
description       | JFK
num_trips         | 225019
avg_trip_duration | 00:45:46.822517
avg_total         | 64.3278115181384683
avg_tip           | 7.3334228220728027
min_distance      | 0.00
avg_distance      | 17.2602816651038357
max_distance      | 221.00
avg_passengers    | 1.7333869584346211
-[ RECORD 2 ]-----+--------------------
description       | Newark
num_trips         | 16822
avg_trip_duration | 00:35:16.157472
avg_total         | 86.4633688027582927
avg_tip           | 9.5461657353465700
min_distance      | 0.00
avg_distance      | 16.2706122934252764
max_distance      | 177.23
avg_passengers    | 1.7435501129473309
```

Based on your analysis, you are able to identify:

> - There are 13x more rides to JFK than Newark. This often leads to heavy traffic on the roads to and from JFK, especially during peak times. They’ve decided to explore road improvements to those areas, as well as increasing public transport to and from the airport (e.g, busses, subway, trains etc)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- There are 13x more rides to JFK than Newark. This often leads to heavy traffic on the roads to and from JFK, especially during peak times. They’ve decided to explore road improvements to those areas, as well as increasing public transport to and from the airport (e.g, buses, subway, trains etc)
```

- Each airport ride has on average the same number of passengers per trip (~1.7 passengers per trip).
- The trip distances are roughly the same 16-17 miles.
- JFK is about 30% cheaper, most likely because of NJ tunnel and highway tolls.
- Newark trips are 22% (10 min) shorter.

This data is useful not just for city planners, but also for airport travellers 
and tourism organizations like the NYC Tourism Bureau. For example, a tourism 
organization could recommend cost-conscious travelers who’d rather not fork out 

> $84 for a ride to Newark to use public transport instead, like the NJ Transit 

Reviewer: > organization could recommend **to** cost-conscious travelers who’d rather not fork out 
$84 for a ride to Newark: **Use** public transport instead, ...

Author: Disagree with this grammatical suggestion.

train from Penn Station ($15.25 for an adult ticket). Similarly, they could 

> recommend those travelling to JFK airport, and who are weary of heavy traffic, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
recommend to those travelling to JFK airport, and who are weary of heavy traffic, 
```

to take the subway and airtrain instead, for just $7.50.

Moreover, you could also make recommendations for those flying out of 
New York City about which airport to choose. For example, from the data above, 
we can recommend those travellers who think they’d be in a rush and who don’t 
mind paying a little extra to consider flying out of Newark over JFK.

If you’ve made it this far, you’ve successfully completed Mission 2 and now 
have a basic understanding of how to analyze time-series data using TimescaleDB!

### Mission 3: Monitoring

> We can also use the time-series data from taxi rides for monitoring 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also use the time-series data from taxi rides to monitor 
```
Active voice better?

a ride’s current status.

>:WARNING: A more realistic setup would involve creating a data pipeline that streams sensor data directly from the cars into TimescaleDB. However, we will use the January 2016 data to illustrate the underlying principles that are applicable regardless of setup.

#### How many rides took place every 5 minutes for the first day of 2016?

> It’s January 1st 2016. NYC riders have celebrated New Year’s Eve, and using taxi 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It’s January 1st 2016. NYC riders have celebrated New Year’s Eve, and are using taxi 
```

cabs to travel to and from their first gathering of the new year.

> The first thing you may like to know is how many rides have recently taken 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first thing you might like to know is how many rides have recently taken 
```

place. We can approximate that by counting the number of rides that were 
completed on the first day of 2016, in 5 minute intervals.

While it's easy to count how many rides took place, there is no easy way 
to segment data by 5 minute time intervals in PostgreSQL. As a result, we 
will need to use a query similar to the query below: 

```sql
-- Vanilla Postgres query for num rides every 5 minutes
SELECT
  EXTRACT(hour from pickup_datetime) as hours,
  trunc(EXTRACT(minute from pickup_datetime) / 5)*5 AS five_mins,
  COUNT(*)
FROM rides
WHERE pickup_datetime < '2016-01-02 00:00'
GROUP BY hours, five_mins;
```

It may not be immediately clear why the above query returns rides segmented 
by 5 minute buckets, so let’s examine it more closely, using the sample time 
of 08:49:00.

In the above query, we first extract the hour that a ride took place in:

```sql
EXTRACT(hour from pickup_datetime) as hours
```
  
So for 08:49 our result for `hours` would be 8. Then we need to calculate, `five_mins`, 
the closest multiple of 5 minutes for a given timestamp. To do this, we calculate 

> the quotient of the minute that a ride took place divided by 5. Then we truncate 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the quotient of the minute that a ride began in divided by 5. Then we truncate 
```

the result to take the floor of that quotient. Afterward, we multiply that truncated 
quotient by 5 to, in essence, find the 5 minute bucket that the minute is closest to:

```sql
trunc(EXTRACT(minute from pickup_datetime) / 5)*5 AS five_mins
```

So our result for time of 08:49 would be `trunc(49/5)*5 = trunc(9.8)*5 = 9*5 = 45`, 
so this time would be in the 45min bucket. After extracting both the hours and which 

> 5 minute interval the time fell into, we’d then group our results, first by the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5 minute interval the time fell into, we then group our results, first by the 
```
Keeps tense consistent

`hours` and then the `five_mins` interval. Whew, that was a lot for a conceptually 
simple question!

> >:TIP: When time is the primary axis on which you're examining data, ordering and grouping information by time is critical. Vanilla PostgreSQL is often not good enough for this purpose. This is one of the biggest reasons why people choose purpose-built time-series databases like TimescaleDB.

Reviewer: This whole tip on further reflection seems salesy?  Especially since the point is made in the paragraph below

```sql
-- How many rides took place every 5 minutes for the first day of 2016?
-- using the TimescaleDB "time_bucket" function
SELECT time_bucket('5 minute', pickup_datetime) AS five_min, count(*)
FROM rides
WHERE pickup_datetime < '2016-01-02 00:00'
GROUP BY five_min 
ORDER BY five_min;
```

The result of your query should start something like this:

```sql
      five_min       | count 
---------------------+-------
 2016-01-01 00:00:00 |   703
 2016-01-01 00:05:00 |  1482
 2016-01-01 00:10:00 |  1959
 2016-01-01 00:15:00 |  2200
 2016-01-01 00:20:00 |  2285

```

#### How many rides on New Year’s morning originated from within 400m of Times Square, in 30 minute buckets?

New York City is famous for its annual Ball Drop New Year’s Eve 
celebration in Times Square. Thousands of people gather to bring in the 
new year together and then head home, to their favorite bar, or first 
gathering of the new year.

This matters to your analysis because you’d like to understand taxi demand
in peak times, and there's no more peak time in New York than the Times Square area 
on the first day of the year.

To answer this question, your first guess might be to use our friend `time_bucket` 

> from the earlier lessons to count rides initiated in 30 minute intervals. But 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from the previous section to count rides initiated in 30 minute intervals. But 
```
`time_bucket` was only _just_ introduced
